Supplementary Figure 6: New locomotion phenotypes for three TRP channels
========================================================================

![](Supplementary%20Figure%206.gif)

New locomotion phenotypes for three TRP channels. Both trpa-2 and ocr-4
have no characterized phenotypes despite previous experimental
publications. We used Wilcoxon rank-sum tests and False-Discovery Rate
(FDR) to determine q-values for each comparison. Corrections were
performed for 329 groups (strains and time-based collections of N2s) by
702 features. Significance was set at q = 0.05. Each experimental mean
is plotted as a black dot and the mean of means is shown in yellow, SEM
in magenta, and standard deviation in cyan. For each allele, the
experiments are brighter and shown on left, whereas the controls are
darker and shown on right. (a) All three trpa-2 alleles (ok3189, tm3085,
and tm3092; trpa-2 N = 19, 35, 38; control N = 41, 133, 93) show
significantly more bends when reversing (q = 6x10-3, 7x10-3, 2x10-5). In
further support, all three alleles show a decrease in their second
eigenworm projection when reversing (q = 7x10-3, 2x10-7, 4x10-5), a
measure of sinusoidal posture. (b) Both trp-2 alleles (gk298 and sy691;
trp-2 N = 18, 21; control N = 49, 55) display significantly altered
activity during reversals as well. Their waveform, when reversing, is
more compact (q = 1x10-4, 4x10-5). Their foraging speed, when reversing,
is faster (q = 4x10-6, 9x10-3). Interestingly, omega turns, which happen
infrequently, also showed up as significant. The two trp-2 strains spend
even less time in omega turns than their wild-type controls (q = 1x10-2,
2x10-2). (c) The ocr-4 alleles (tm2173 and vs137; ocr-4 N = 22, 22;
control N = 55, 49) also display significant differences when
subdividing by motion state. Both alleles move their tail more when
paused (q = 9x10-5 , 3x10-3). Furthermore, both ocr-4 alleles display
smaller amplitudes when crawling (q = 2x10Â­3, 5x10-3).
